
March 10, 2013
Harsh Words by Afghan Leader Add Tension to Hagel Visit
By ALISSA J. RUBIN and THOM SHANKER
KABUL, Afghanistan — President Hamid Karzai leveled particularly harsh accusations against the United States on Sunday, suggesting that Americans were destabilizing his country and casting a shadow over a visit by Chuck Hagel, the new American defense secretary.

The sharp words came in the wake of weeks of episodes that Mr. Karzai views as an affront to Afghanistan’s sovereignty — civilian deaths in airstrikes, accusations of abuses by American Special Operations forces and most recently, the last-minute refusal by American officials to give Afghanistan full control of Bagram Prison because of a disagreement about the continuing American role there.

After an announcement that a joint news conference with Mr. Hagel and Mr. Karzai had been canceled amid “security concerns,” the two men met for private discussions and dinner. Afterward, Mr. Hagel, making his first trip to Afghanistan as defense secretary, said late Sunday that the two had “a very direct conversation.”

“I know these are difficult issues for President Karzai and the Afghan people,” said Mr. Hagel, a former Republican senator from Nebraska. “And I was once a politician. So I can understand the kind of pressures — especially leaders of countries — are always under.”

The defense secretary expressed hope that the United States and Afghanistan “could move forward, and I have confidence we will, and deal with these issues.”

Among Mr. Karzai’s critical comments on Sunday, which came at an early morning news conference in honor of Women’s Day, he charged that the American government and the Taliban, while using different means, had in effect colluded to keep Afghanistan unstable in order to justify a continued American military presence.

As the United States and Afghanistan are conducting tense negotiations over the role of American forces in the country after the NATO mission expires in 2014, Mr. Karzai has been critical about what he sees as pessimistic reports about Afghanistan’s future. He described such predictions as propaganda, promulgated through the Western news media and picked up locally, with the goal of undermining Afghan confidence and, by extension, faith in his government.

“There is a lot of negative propaganda about what will happen after 2014,” said Mr. Karzai, adding that it has come to be thought of it as “the 2014 movie,” suggesting that it was being forecast as a disaster show.

He also accused Americans of sending contradictory messages about their views of the Taliban: on the one hand claiming to see them as the enemy, but at the same time reaching out to them to engage in negotiations. While the Americans say they are not negotiating now with the Taliban, they have done so in the past, and many Afghans say they are confused about the United States’ true intentions.

“On the one hand the Taliban are talking with the Americans, but on the other hand they carry out a bombing in Kabul,” he said, referring to the bomb that exploded Saturday in front of the Defense Ministry.

“Yesterday’s bombing in Kabul and Khost didn’t aim to show Taliban’s strength; indeed, they served America. By those bombings they served the 2014 negative slogan,” he said. “These bombings aimed to prolong the presence of the American forces in Afghanistan.”

In a separate complaint, he said that an Afghan engineering student in the southern city of Kandahar had been badly abused at an American-run prison on Saturday night after being detained by Afghan forces backed by the C.I.A.

“Last night around 10 p.m. something horrible happened: a group of American militias had harassed a university student,” Mr. Karzai said, adding that he had succeeded in getting the man, who said he had been beaten, released from “the foreigners’ prison.”

In comments before the meeting between Mr. Karzai and Mr. Hagel, the new international military commander in Afghanistan, Gen. Joseph P. Dunford, insisted that the two countries were still getting along, saying, “We do not have a broken relationship.”

But he contested Mr. Karzai’s claims of working at cross-purposes with the Afghan government. “We have fought too hard over the past 12 years, we have shed too much blood over the past 12 years, we have done too much to help the Afghan security forces grow over the past 12 years to ever think that violence or instability would be to our advantage,” General Dunford told reporters traveling with Mr. Hagel.

Afghans analysts on Sunday pointed out that the backdrop to Mr. Karzai’s anger was cancellation of the agreement to hand over Bagram Prison, which embarrassed Mr. Karzai; he had announced to Parliament in his inaugural address in January that Afghans were on the verge of taking control of Bagram’s detention operations.

“His prestige as president was degraded in the eyes of the public by the Americans’ refusal to hand over responsibility of the prison to the Afghans. I think it drives him crazy when he sees it’s not happening,” said Atiqullah Amarkhel, a former Afghan Army general and a military analyst. “It also shows a deep sense of distrust between two one-time allies. To the public, it means all the power is with foreigners.”


Facebook Connect
New York Times

MORE IN ASIA PACIFIC (3 OF 55 ARTICLES)
In Wake of Cyberattacks, China Seeks New Rules
Read More »
Close
