
March 9, 2013
A Jewel in Albany Regains Its Luster
By JESSE McKINLEY
ALBANY — The Capitol Building here has always been as much a symbol as a building. Soaring, ornate and hand-built over a 32-year span during the industrial heyday of the late 19th century, the Capitol was a testament to the state’s architectural might and the moxie of New Yorkers and their government. It also, of course, spoke to the tendency, sometimes still in evidence, to overspend and procrastinate on big projects. The Capitol’s $25 million price tag, a figure that translates to more than half a billion dollars today, made it one of the most expensive public-works projects in the nation’s history.

The building’s renovation — which began in 2000 — also seemed rife with meaning to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who took office in 2011 and promptly accelerated the pace of the overhaul.

“The Capitol was in many ways for me a metaphor of turning government around, of cleaning government up, of making it work,” said Mr. Cuomo, who added that the lingering renovation had left the building dirty, dusty and darkened by scaffolding. “In management they say, ‘Come up with a series of short-term goals that you can focus on and achieve,’ ” he said. “So we had a short-term goal: we’re going to get the building done.”

Sure enough, late last year the restoration was declared complete, almost two years ahead of schedule, according to the governor’s office, something that it says saved taxpayers nearly $3 million. A self-described architecture buff, Mr. Cuomo has an impressive knowledge of the building’s odd historical intricacies — including a series of carved stone faces in the so-called Million Dollar Staircase, hidden doors and a semi-secret elevator once used by Franklin D. Roosevelt.

During a recent walking tour with a reporter, Mr. Cuomo seemed enthralled by the handiwork of men who had built the building. “I was awe-struck by the place,” he said of earlier memories of Albany in 1982, when he was a special assistant to his father, Mario. “And you know the way they built it and designed it, they wanted you to be awe-struck.”

More Photos of the Newly Restored Capitol Building in Albany »


Facebook Connect
New York Times
WebTrends

MORE IN N.Y. / REGION (11 OF 26 ARTICLES)
City Room: At a Neighborhood Church in Rome, Dolan Delivers a Star Turn
Read More »
Close
